DEPLOYMENT.md, before:

# Deployment Guide

This guide will help you deploy PromptGrade to production.

## Overview

PromptGrade consists of two parts in the **same repository**:
1. **Frontend** - React app in root directory
2. **Backend** - Express.js API server in `server/` directory

> **Recommended**: Deploy both frontend and backend to **Netlify** using Netlify Functions. This allows everything to be deployed together in one place!

## Option 1: Deploy Everything to Netlify (Recommended) ⭐

This is the easiest option since both frontend and backend are in the same repo. Netlify Functions will handle your Express backend as serverless functions.

### Step 1: Configure Netlify

1. **Create a Netlify account** at [netlify.com](https://netlify.com)

2. **Connect your repository:**
   - Go to "Add new site" → "Import an existing project"
   - Connect your GitHub repository

3. **Configure build settings** (Netlify will auto-detect from `netlify.toml`, but verify):
   - **Build command**: `pnpm build` or `npm run build`
   - **Publish directory**: `dist`
   - **Base directory**: `/` (root)

4. **Add Environment Variables** in Netlify dashboard:
   - Go to Site settings → Environment variables
   - Add the following:
     ```
     VITE_GROQ_API_KEY=your_groq_api_key_here
     MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
     ```
   - **Note**: You don't need to set `VITE_API_URL` - the app will automatically use relative URLs (`/api`) when deployed on Netlify

5. **Deploy:**
   - Netlify will automatically deploy on every push to your main branch
   - Or click "Deploy site" to deploy immediately

### How It Works

- The `netlify.toml` file configures Netlify to:
  - Build your frontend React app
  - Deploy your Express backend as a Netlify Function
  - Route `/api/*` requests to the function
- Your API will be available at: `https://your-site.netlify.app/api/*`
- The frontend automatically uses relative URLs when on Netlify

### Troubleshooting Netlify Functions

If you see errors like `Cannot find module 'express'`:

1. **Check build logs**: Go to Netlify dashboard → Deploys → Click on the latest deploy → View build logs
2. **Verify dependencies**: Ensure all backend dependencies (`express`, `cors`, `mongoose`, `serverless-http`, `@netlify/functions`) are in `dependencies` (not `devDependencies`) in `package.json`
3. **Check Node version**: Netlify should use Node 18+ (check in Site settings → Build & deploy → Environment)
4. **Rebuild**: Try triggering a new deployment after making changes
5. **Check function logs**: Go to Functions tab in Netlify dashboard to see runtime errors

### Verify Deployment

1. **Test Backend:**
   - Visit: `https://your-site.netlify.app/api/health`
   - Should return: `{"status":"ok","message":"API is running"}`

2. **Test Frontend:**
   - Visit your Netlify URL
   - Try creating a quiz
   - Check browser console for any API errors

## Option 2: Deploy Separately (Alternative)

If you prefer to deploy the backend separately (e.g., to Railway or Render), follow the instructions below.

### Step 1: Deploy Backend

> **Note**: Since both frontend and backend are in the same repository, you need to configure the deployment platform to use the `server` directory.

#### Option A: Deploy to Railway

1. **Create a Railway account** at [railway.app](https://railway.app)

2. **Create a new project** and select "Deploy from GitHub repo"

3. **Configure your project:**
   - Select your repository
   - Railway will auto-detect it's a Node.js project
   - **Important**: Set the **Root Directory** to `/` (root - this is where package.json is)
   - Set the **Start Command** to: `pnpm start:server` or `cd server && npx tsx index.ts`
   - Railway will automatically run `pnpm install` or `npm install` in the root directory (where all dependencies are)

4. **Add Environment Variables** in Railway dashboard:
   ```
   MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
   PORT=3000
   NODE_ENV=production
   ```

5. **Get your backend URL:**
   - Railway will provide a URL like: `https://your-app-name.up.railway.app`
   - Your API will be at: `https://your-app-name.up.railway.app/api`

#### Option B: Deploy to Render

1. **Create a Render account** at [render.com](https://render.com)

2. **Create a new Web Service:**
   - Connect your GitHub repository
   - **Important**: Set **Root Directory** to `/` (root - this is where package.json is)
   - Set **Build Command**: `pnpm install` or `npm install` (install dependencies from root)
   - Set **Start Command**: `pnpm start:server` or `cd server && npx tsx index.ts`

3. **Add Environment Variables:**
   ```
   MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
   PORT=10000
   NODE_ENV=production
   ```

4. **Get your backend URL:**
   - Render will provide: `https://your-app-name.onrender.com`
   - Your API will be at: `https://your-app-name.onrender.com/api`

#### Option C: Deploy to Fly.io

1. **Install Fly CLI**: `curl -L https://fly.io/install.sh | sh`

2. **Login**: `fly auth login`

3. **Create app**: `fly launch` (in the `server` directory)

4. **Set secrets**:
   ```bash
   fly secrets set MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
   fly secrets set NODE_ENV=production
   ```

5. **Deploy**: `fly deploy`

### Step 2: Deploy Frontend to Netlify (If Backend is Separate)

1. **Create a Netlify account** at [netlify.com](https://netlify.com)

2. **Connect your repository:**
   - Go to "Add new site" → "Import an existing project"
   - Connect your GitHub repository (the same repo that has both frontend and backend)

3. **Configure build settings:**
   - **Base directory**: `/` (root - leave blank or set to `/`)
   - **Build command**: `pnpm build` or `npm run build`
   - **Publish directory**: `dist`
   - Netlify will automatically ignore the `server` folder since it's not part of the frontend build

4. **Add Environment Variables** in Netlify dashboard:
   - Go to Site settings → Environment variables
   - Add the following:
     ```
     VITE_GROQ_API_KEY=your_groq_api_key_here
     VITE_API_URL=https://your-backend-url.com/api
     ```
   - **Important**: Replace `https://your-backend-url.com/api` with your actual backend URL from Step 1
   - Make sure to include `/api` at the end
   - Example: `https://promptgrade-api.railway.app/api`

5. **Deploy:**
   - Netlify will automatically deploy on every push to your main branch
   - Or click "Deploy site" to deploy immediately

### Step 3: Update CORS on Backend (Only if Deploying Separately)

If you deployed the backend separately (Option 2), update your backend CORS configuration:

1. **In Railway/Render/Fly.io**, add an environment variable:
   ```
   FRONTEND_URL=https://your-netlify-app.netlify.app
   ```

2. Or update `server/app.ts` to include your Netlify URL in the allowed origins.

> **Note**: If using Netlify Functions (Option 1), CORS is already configured to allow your Netlify domain.

### Step 4: Verify Deployment

1. **Test Backend:**
   - Visit: `https://your-backend-url.com/api/health`
   - Should return: `{"status":"ok","message":"API is running"}`

2. **Test Frontend:**
   - Visit your Netlify URL
   - Try creating a quiz
   - Check browser console for any API errors

## Troubleshooting

### Frontend can't connect to backend

- **Check environment variable**: Make sure `VITE_API_URL` is set correctly in Netlify (only if using Option 2)
- **Check CORS**: Ensure your backend allows requests from your Netlify domain
- **Check backend URL**: Verify the backend is running and accessible
- **Check API path**: Make sure `VITE_API_URL` ends with `/api` (only if using Option 2)
- **For Netlify Functions**: Check Netlify function logs in the dashboard

### Backend connection errors

- **Check MongoDB URI**: Verify your MongoDB connection string is correct
- **Check environment variables**: Ensure all required variables are set
- **Check logs**: Look at Railway/Render/Netlify logs for error messages
- **For Netlify Functions**: Check that `MONGODB_URI` is set in Netlify environment variables

### Build errors

- **Check Node version**: Ensure your deployment platform uses Node 18+
- **Check dependencies**: Make sure all packages are in `package.json`
- **Check build command**: Verify the build command matches your package manager
- **For Netlify Functions**: Ensure `serverless-http` and `@netlify/functions` are installed

## Environment Variables Summary

### Frontend + Backend on Netlify (Option 1 - Recommended)
```
VITE_GROQ_API_KEY=your_groq_api_key
MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
```
> Note: `VITE_API_URL` is not needed - the app uses relative URLs automatically

### Frontend on Netlify, Backend Separate (Option 2)
**Frontend (Netlify):**
```
VITE_GROQ_API_KEY=your_groq_api_key
VITE_API_URL=https://your-backend-url.com/api
```

**Backend (Railway/Render/Fly.io):**
```
MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
PORT=3000 (or auto-assigned)
NODE_ENV=production
FRONTEND_URL=https://your-netlify-app.netlify.app (optional, for CORS)
```

## Quick Reference

- **Backend Health Check**: `https://your-site.netlify.app/api/health` (Option 1) or `https://your-backend-url.com/api/health` (Option 2)
- **Frontend**: `https://your-netlify-app.netlify.app`
- **API Base URL**: `/api` (Option 1) or `https://your-backend-url.com/api` (Option 2)

Commit message:

Update DEPLOYMENT.md with additional troubleshooting steps for Netlify Functions, including handling mongoose issues, and modify netlify.toml to allow esbuild to bundle all dependencies. Enhance clarity on deployment processes and potential solutions for common errors.

DEPLOYMENT.md, after:

# Deployment Guide

This guide will help you deploy PromptGrade to production.

## Overview

PromptGrade consists of two parts in the **same repository**:
1. **Frontend** - React app in root directory
2. **Backend** - Express.js API server in `server/` directory

> **Recommended**: Deploy both frontend and backend to **Netlify** using Netlify Functions. This allows everything to be deployed together in one place!

## Option 1: Deploy Everything to Netlify (Recommended) ⭐

This is the easiest option since both frontend and backend are in the same repo. Netlify Functions will handle your Express backend as serverless functions.

### Step 1: Configure Netlify

1. **Create a Netlify account** at [netlify.com](https://netlify.com)

2. **Connect your repository:**
   - Go to "Add new site" → "Import an existing project"
   - Connect your GitHub repository

3. **Configure build settings** (Netlify will auto-detect from `netlify.toml`, but verify):
   - **Build command**: `pnpm build` or `npm run build`
   - **Publish directory**: `dist`
   - **Base directory**: `/` (root)

4. **Add Environment Variables** in Netlify dashboard:
   - Go to Site settings → Environment variables
   - Add the following:
     ```
     VITE_GROQ_API_KEY=your_groq_api_key_here
     MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
     ```
   - **Note**: You don't need to set `VITE_API_URL` - the app will automatically use relative URLs (`/api`) when deployed on Netlify

5. **Deploy:**
   - Netlify will automatically deploy on every push to your main branch
   - Or click "Deploy site" to deploy immediately

### How It Works

- The `netlify.toml` file configures Netlify to:
  - Build your frontend React app
  - Deploy your Express backend as a Netlify Function
  - Route `/api/*` requests to the function
- Your API will be available at: `https://your-site.netlify.app/api/*`
- The frontend automatically uses relative URLs when on Netlify

### Troubleshooting Netlify Functions

If you see errors like `Cannot find module 'express'` or `Cannot find module 'mongoose'`:

1. **Check build logs**: Go to Netlify dashboard → Deploys → Click on the latest deploy → View build logs
2. **Verify dependencies**: Ensure all backend dependencies (`express`, `cors`, `mongoose`, `serverless-http`, `@netlify/functions`) are in `dependencies` (not `devDependencies`) in `package.json`
3. **Check Node version**: Netlify should use Node 18+ (check in Site settings → Build & deploy → Environment)
4. **Check package manager**: If using pnpm, ensure Netlify is configured to use it (or switch to npm in build command)
5. **Clear build cache**: In Netlify dashboard → Site settings → Build & deploy → Clear cache and retry
6. **Rebuild**: Try triggering a new deployment after making changes
7. **Check function logs**: Go to Functions tab in Netlify dashboard to see runtime errors

**If mongoose still fails after bundling:**
- Mongoose has native dependencies that might not bundle well
- Try using `mongodb` driver directly instead of mongoose
- Or deploy backend separately to Railway/Render (Option 2)

### Verify Deployment

1. **Test Backend:**
   - Visit: `https://your-site.netlify.app/api/health`
   - Should return: `{"status":"ok","message":"API is running"}`

2. **Test Frontend:**
   - Visit your Netlify URL
   - Try creating a quiz
   - Check browser console for any API errors

## Option 2: Deploy Separately (Alternative)

If you prefer to deploy the backend separately (e.g., to Railway or Render), follow the instructions below.

### Step 1: Deploy Backend

> **Note**: Since both frontend and backend are in the same repository, you need to configure the deployment platform to use the `server` directory.

#### Option A: Deploy to Railway

1. **Create a Railway account** at [railway.app](https://railway.app)

2. **Create a new project** and select "Deploy from GitHub repo"

3. **Configure your project:**
   - Select your repository
   - Railway will auto-detect it's a Node.js project
   - **Important**: Set the **Root Directory** to `/` (root - this is where package.json is)
   - Set the **Start Command** to: `pnpm start:server` or `cd server && npx tsx index.ts`
   - Railway will automatically run `pnpm install` or `npm install` in the root directory (where all dependencies are)

4. **Add Environment Variables** in Railway dashboard:
   ```
   MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
   PORT=3000
   NODE_ENV=production
   ```

5. **Get your backend URL:**
   - Railway will provide a URL like: `https://your-app-name.up.railway.app`
   - Your API will be at: `https://your-app-name.up.railway.app/api`

#### Option B: Deploy to Render

1. **Create a Render account** at [render.com](https://render.com)

2. **Create a new Web Service:**
   - Connect your GitHub repository
   - **Important**: Set **Root Directory** to `/` (root - this is where package.json is)
   - Set **Build Command**: `pnpm install` or `npm install` (install dependencies from root)
   - Set **Start Command**: `pnpm start:server` or `cd server && npx tsx index.ts`

3. **Add Environment Variables:**
   ```
   MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
   PORT=10000
   NODE_ENV=production
   ```

4. **Get your backend URL:**
   - Render will provide: `https://your-app-name.onrender.com`
   - Your API will be at: `https://your-app-name.onrender.com/api`

#### Option C: Deploy to Fly.io

1. **Install Fly CLI**: `curl -L https://fly.io/install.sh | sh`

2. **Login**: `fly auth login`

3. **Create app**: `fly launch` (in the `server` directory)

4. **Set secrets**:
   ```bash
   fly secrets set MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
   fly secrets set NODE_ENV=production
   ```

5. **Deploy**: `fly deploy`

### Step 2: Deploy Frontend to Netlify (If Backend is Separate)

1. **Create a Netlify account** at [netlify.com](https://netlify.com)

2. **Connect your repository:**
   - Go to "Add new site" → "Import an existing project"
   - Connect your GitHub repository (the same repo that has both frontend and backend)

3. **Configure build settings:**
   - **Base directory**: `/` (root - leave blank or set to `/`)
   - **Build command**: `pnpm build` or `npm run build`
   - **Publish directory**: `dist`
   - Netlify will automatically ignore the `server` folder since it's not part of the frontend build

4. **Add Environment Variables** in Netlify dashboard:
   - Go to Site settings → Environment variables
   - Add the following:
     ```
     VITE_GROQ_API_KEY=your_groq_api_key_here
     VITE_API_URL=https://your-backend-url.com/api
     ```
   - **Important**: Replace `https://your-backend-url.com/api` with your actual backend URL from Step 1
   - Make sure to include `/api` at the end
   - Example: `https://promptgrade-api.railway.app/api`

5. **Deploy:**
   - Netlify will automatically deploy on every push to your main branch
   - Or click "Deploy site" to deploy immediately

### Step 3: Update CORS on Backend (Only if Deploying Separately)

If you deployed the backend separately (Option 2), update your backend CORS configuration:

1. **In Railway/Render/Fly.io**, add an environment variable:
   ```
   FRONTEND_URL=https://your-netlify-app.netlify.app
   ```

2. Or update `server/app.ts` to include your Netlify URL in the allowed origins.

> **Note**: If using Netlify Functions (Option 1), CORS is already configured to allow your Netlify domain.

### Step 4: Verify Deployment

1. **Test Backend:**
   - Visit: `https://your-backend-url.com/api/health`
   - Should return: `{"status":"ok","message":"API is running"}`

2. **Test Frontend:**
   - Visit your Netlify URL
   - Try creating a quiz
   - Check browser console for any API errors

## Troubleshooting

### Frontend can't connect to backend

- **Check environment variable**: Make sure `VITE_API_URL` is set correctly in Netlify (only if using Option 2)
- **Check CORS**: Ensure your backend allows requests from your Netlify domain
- **Check backend URL**: Verify the backend is running and accessible
- **Check API path**: Make sure `VITE_API_URL` ends with `/api` (only if using Option 2)
- **For Netlify Functions**: Check Netlify function logs in the dashboard

### Backend connection errors

- **Check MongoDB URI**: Verify your MongoDB connection string is correct
- **Check environment variables**: Ensure all required variables are set
- **Check logs**: Look at Railway/Render/Netlify logs for error messages
- **For Netlify Functions**: Check that `MONGODB_URI` is set in Netlify environment variables

### Build errors

- **Check Node version**: Ensure your deployment platform uses Node 18+
- **Check dependencies**: Make sure all packages are in `package.json`
- **Check build command**: Verify the build command matches your package manager
- **For Netlify Functions**: Ensure `serverless-http` and `@netlify/functions` are installed

## Environment Variables Summary

### Frontend + Backend on Netlify (Option 1 - Recommended)
```
VITE_GROQ_API_KEY=your_groq_api_key
MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
```
> Note: `VITE_API_URL` is not needed - the app uses relative URLs automatically

### Frontend on Netlify, Backend Separate (Option 2)
**Frontend (Netlify):**
```
VITE_GROQ_API_KEY=your_groq_api_key
VITE_API_URL=https://your-backend-url.com/api
```

**Backend (Railway/Render/Fly.io):**
```
MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
PORT=3000 (or auto-assigned)
NODE_ENV=production
FRONTEND_URL=https://your-netlify-app.netlify.app (optional, for CORS)
```

## Quick Reference

- **Backend Health Check**: `https://your-site.netlify.app/api/health` (Option 1) or `https://your-backend-url.com/api/health` (Option 2)
- **Frontend**: `https://your-netlify-app.netlify.app`
- **API Base URL**: `/api` (Option 1) or `https://your-backend-url.com/api` (Option 2)
